## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Aligning terminological resources, including ontologies, controlled vocabularies and taxonomies, is a critical part of data integration in many domains such as healthcare, chemistry and biomedical research.

Entity mapping is the process of determining correspondences between entities across these resources, such as gene identifiers, disease concepts or chemical entity identifiers. Many tools have been developed to compute such mappings based on common structural features and lexical information such as labels and synonyms. Lexical approaches in particular often provide very high recall, but low precision, due to lexical ambiguity. 

Large Language Models (LLMs), such as the ones employed by ChatGPT, have generalizable abilities to perform a wide range of tasks, including question answering and
information extraction. 

Here we present *MapperGPT*, an approach based on LLMs to refine and predict mapping relationships
as a post-processing step, that works in
concert with existing high-recall methods that are based on lexical and structural heuristics.

We evaluated *MapperGPT* on a series of alignment tasks from different domains, including anatomy, developmental
biology, and renal diseases.
We devised a collection of tasks that are designed to be particularly challenging
for lexical methods. We show that when used in combination with high-recall methods
*MapperGPT* can provide a substantial improvement in accuracy beating state of the art methods such as LogMap.
